>>> ON THIS EDITION FO
SATURDAY, OCTOBER 12th, SOME
CONGRESSMEN HEAD HOME WITHOU
REACHING A DEAL ON THE
GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN OR THE DEB
CEILING.
>>> IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT
ARE THESE MEN STRANDED ON A TINY
PACIFIC ISLAND DANGEROUS O
COLLATERAL DAMAGE IN THE WAR O
TERROR
>> THEY THOUGHT THE UNITED
STATES WILL SORT THIS OUT.
THEY WERE SOON TO FIND OUT THA
THAT WOULD NOT BE THEIR FATE
>>> AND A RARE GLIMPSE OF IRAN
THROUGH ITS ART.
NEXT ON PBS "NEWS HOUR WEEKEND
FROM THE TISH STUDIOS IN NEW
YORK, HARI SREENIVASAN
>>> GOOD EVENING
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
SEVERAL NATIONAL PARKS AROUN
THE NATION ARE STARTING TO
REOPEN FOLLOWING A DECISION BY
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION TO LE
THE STATES PAY THE COST OF
OPERATING THEM
THE PARKS HAVE BEEN CLOSED T
TOURISTS SINCE THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT SHUT DOWN 11 DAYS
AGO.
THE PARK CLOSURES HAVE COS
BUSINESSES TENS OF MILLIONS OF
DOLLARS.
A MUCH LARGER DEAL TO GET TH
GOVERNMENT UP AND RUNNING AGAI
AND TO RAISE THE DEBT CEILIN
CONTINUES TO PROVE ELUSIVE
CABLE NEWS HEADLINES THROUGHOU
THE DAY TOLD THE STORY
ONE SAID TALKS HAVE HIT A BRIC
WALL
ANOTHER BLARED, SENATE TEST VOTE
FAILS.
A THIRD, NO HOUSE VOTE TIL
MONDAY NIGHT
ALL FOLLOWING REPORTS OF
PROGRESS BETWEEN THE TWO PARTIES
AS THEY TRY TO AVERT WHAT TH
TREASURY SECRETARY AND OTHER
WARN WOULD BE A CATASTROPHIC
DEFAULT IF THE DEBT CEILING IS
NOT RAISED BY NEXT THURSDAY.
EARLIER TODAY IN HIS WEEKL
RADIO ADDRESS, THE PRESIDENT
NOTED RECENT PROGRESS IN TALKS
TO BREAK THE STALEMATE
>> THE POSITIVE DEVELOPMENT THAT
HOUSE REPUBLICANS HAVE AGREED ON
THE NEED TO AVOID THE ECONOMIC
CONSEQUENCES OF NOT MEETING OU
COUNTRY'S COMMITMENTS BECAUS
ONCE THE DEBT CEILING IS RAISE
AND THE SHUTDOWN IS OVER
THERE'S A LOT WE CAN ACCOMPLIS
TOGETHER
>> IN THE REPUBLICAN RESPONSE,
REPRESENTATIVE BUCK McKEON O
CALIFORNIA ALSO STRUCK A
POSITIVE TONE.
>> FOR ALL THE FOCUS O
DISAGREEMENTS IN WASHINGTON,
WE'VE ACTUALLY FOUND SOME COMMON
GROUND THIS WEEK
>> TO TRY TO EXPLAIN WHERE ALL
THIS IS HEADED, WE'RE JOINED B
MEREDITH SHINER.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
DOWN TO 100 HOURS OR SO BEFORE
THE DEBT CEILING DEADLINE.
WALK US THROUGH MAYBE IN DETAI
ON WHAT HAPPENS BETWEEN NOW AN
THEN
>> IT BECAME ABUNDANTLY CLEA
THE HOUSE COULDN'T MOVE THROUG
ON A PLAN.
SENATOR MITCH McCONNELL AN
SENATOR HARRY REID, THE TW
LEADERS OF THE SENATE, ARE
WORKING TO TRY TO FIND SOME SORT
OF AGREEMENT
YOU ALSO HAVE A LARGER GROUP O
BIPARTISAN SENATORS LED BY SUSAN
COLLINS, REPUBLICAN FROM MAINE
TRYING TO FIND A COMPROMISED
POSITION
EARLIER THIS WEEK THERE WASN'T
MOVEMENT AT ALL.
IT SEEMS TO BE BOTH SIDES WERE
VERY MUCH ENTRENCHED IN THEI
POSITIONS, THAT THEY DID NOT
WANT TO NEGOTIATE UNLESS THE
OTHER SIDE WERE WILLING TO MAK
CONCESSIONS.
DEMOCRATS RIGHT NOW FEEL LIK
THEY HAVE ALL THE LEVERAGE
THERE WAS THAT NBC/"WALL STREE
JOURNAL" POLL THAT SHOWE
TERRIBLE NUMBERS FOR
REPUBLICANS.
THE DEMOCRATS ARE MOVING FORWARD
WITH THE KNOWLEDGE THAT TH
REPUBLICANS ARE GOING TO HAVE TO
GIVE MORE IN THIS.
AT THIS POINT, THEY FEEL LIK
THE REPUBLICANS HAVE KEPT TH
GOVERNMENT SHUT DOWN AND ARE
BASICALLY STEERING CONGRES
TOWARDS THIS DEBT LIMIT DEADLINE
WITH NO REAL WAY OUT
>> IF THE SENATE REPUBLICANS
MAKE MORE MODERATE CONCESSIONS
OR APPROACHES TO THE STRAGS, HOW
LIKELY IS IT THAT THE HOUS
REPUBLICANS WILL GO ALONG WITH
IT
>> I THINK THAT'S THE BIGGES
QUESTION RIGHT NOW
I THINK WHAT MITCH McCONNELL I
ABLE TO DO AND WHAT SENATE
REPUBLICANS ARE ABLE TO DO MIGHT
NOT BE THE SAME AS WHAT JOHN
BOEHNER IS ABLE TO DO WITH HIS
CAUCUS
AT THE END OF THE DAY, SENAT
REPUBLICANS AND SENATE DEMOCRATS
DON'T COME TO AN AGREEMENT AND
SEND IT UP TO THE HOUSE, IT WILL
BE UP TO JOHN BOEHNER TO FIN
ONLY A HANDFUL OF REPUBLICAN
BECAUSE A MAJORITY OF HOUS
DEMOCRATIC SUPPORT WILL BE
THERE.
ONE OF THE BIGGER QUESTIONS TO
DATE IS HOW WILLING IS JOH
BOEHNER TO MOVE A BILL THAT HE
KNOWS WON'T HAVE THE SUPPORT O
THE MAJORITY OF HIS CAUCUS
TO DATE, IT'S BEEN UNWILLING
BUT I THINK REPUBLICANS,
PARTICULARLY REPUBLICANS I
LEADERSHIP, HAVE BEEN HEARIN
FROM THE BUSINESS COMMUNITY.
THEY'VE BEEN HEARING FROM WALL
STREET, DONORS, PEOPLE WHO ARE
TYPICALLY THE BREAD-AND-BUTTER
REPUBLICAN SUPPORTERS WHO AR
QUESTIONING WHY THIS PARTY WOULD
LET A EXTREME FACTION OF THEIR
GROUP BASICALLY DECIDE THAT THEY
COULD TAKE THIS DEBT LIMIT
ARGUMENT TO THE BRINK AGAIN WHEN
IT COULD HAVE SERIOUS ECONOMIC
CONSEQUENCES
>> WHAT HAPPENS TO THE TEA PARTY
OR SENATOR TED CRUZ HAS BECOME
ONE OF THE FACES OF THEI
IDEOLOGY IN THIS ALL
>> WELL, CRUZ HAS TAKEN
DISTINCT APPROACH TO PROMOTING
HIS AGENDA
IF YOU LOOK AT SOMEONE LIK
SENATOR RAND PAUL, FOR EXAMPLE
WHO ALSO HAS A LOT OF TEA PART
SUPPORT, HE'S BEEN MUCH MORE
WILLING TO PLAY NICE WITH HI
COLLEAGUES
TO DEAL WITH MITCH McCONNELL, TO
HAVE VOTES ON HIS MEASURES BUT
NOT TO SIGN THE SUCCESS OF THOSE
VOTES AS A BINARY WIN OR LOSE.
AS LONG AS WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
HIS POLICY ITEMS, HE'S HAPPY
TED CRUZ IS NOT THAT WAY
HE'S MADE THE FIGHT A LOT MORE
DIFFICULT ABOUT REPUBLICANS BY
MAKING IT ABOUT A HEALTH CAR
LAW THERE WAS NO WAY TO REPEAL
I DON'T KNOW WHAT THE FUTURE I
FOR HIM IN THE REPUBLICA
CONFERENCE OVER THE NEXT FEW
YEARS IF REPUBLICANS ARE ABLE TO
OPEN WITH DEMOCRATS TO OPEN UP
THE.
I DON'T KNOW IF HE'S ALL THA
INTERESTED IN DEALING WITH HIS
COLLEAGUES
HE SAID YESTERDAY THAT HE WENT
OVER THE HEAD OF LEADERSHIP AN
DEALT DIRECTLY WITH THE AMERICAN
PEOPLE
HE'LL ALWAYS HAVE GRASSROOTS
SUPPORT.
BUT I DON'T KNOW THAT THAT'S
ENOUGH TO EITHER ADVANCE ANY
SORT OF NATIONAL RUN BECAUSE YOU
NEED AN INFRASTRUCTURE I
FUND-RAISING AND IT'S CERTAINL
NOT ENOUGH TO DEAL WITH YOUR OWN
COLLEAGUES TO GET ANYTHING DON
LEGISLATIVELY.
>> SENATOR REID HAS WARNED THE
MARKETS WILL REACT NEGATIVEL
MONDAY MORNING
ANY REAL CHANCE THAT THERE I
NOT A DEAL DONE BEFORE THE DEB
LIMIT CLOCK RUNS OUT
>> ANOTHER THING YOU HAVE TO
REMEMBER IS THAT GIVEN SENAT
PROCEDURE, IF ANY ONE SENATO
OBJECTS, YOU COULD HAVE TO EAT
UP TO 30 HOURS AFTER ORIGINA
PROCEDURAL MOTION.
SO ONE LIKE TED CRUZ COULD I
FACT STEP IN AND TRY TO MAKE
THAT CLOCK RUN OUT
SO THERE IS SOME PRESSURE TO TRY
TO GET SOMETHING EITHER TODAY OR
TOMORROW
BUT IF YOU DON'T WASTE THA
TIME, EVEN IF THERE WERE A
AGREEMENT TODAY, YOU WOULDN'
SEE A VOTE UNTIL MONDAY MORNING.
THEN IT WILL BE UP TO THE HOUS
TO TAKE THOSE TWO, THREE DAY
AND SEE IF THEY CAN PASS
SOMETHING.
BUT I DON'T THINK THEY'RE GOIN
TO HAVE MUCH OF A CHOICE TO SEND
A BILL BACK.
THEY HAVE TO FIND A WAY TO PAS
WHATEVER THE SENATE SENDS THEM
>> MEREDITH, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU
>>> OVERSEAS, NEW DETAILS AR
EMERGING ABOUT THE DEATHS OF
DOZENS OF MIGRANTS WHO DROWNED
YESTERDAY AFTER THEIR BOAT
CAPSIZED IN WATERS BETWEEN NORTH
AFRICA AND ITALY
MORE THAN 200 OTHERS WER
RESCUED, INCLUDING MANY WOME
AND CHILDREN
AUTHORITIES SAY MANY OF THOS
ABOARD THE CAPSIZED VESSEL WER
SYRIANS FLEEING THE CIVIL WAR IN
THAT COUNTRY
SYRIANS WERE ALSO ON BOARD A
VESSEL WHICH CAPSIZED NEAR
ALEXANDRIA, EGYPT, YESTERDAY
KILLING A DOZEN MORE
THIS INCIDENTS OCCURRED ONLY
EIGHT DAYS AFTER ANOTHER
MIGRANT-FILLED BOAT SANK, TAKING
THE LIVES OF MORE THAN 300
PEOPLE
>>> INDIA IS GETTING HIT BY
HUGE STORM
THE STORM PACKING HEAVY RAIN
AND HIGH WINDS IS DESCRIBED BY
AUTHORITIES AS VERY SEVERE
IT HAS ALREADY LED TO TH
EVACUATION OF MORE THAN 500,00
PEOPLE
ONE AMERICAN HURRICANE
RESEARCHER SAID YOU DON'T GE
STORMS STRONGER THAN THI
ANYWHERE IN THE WORLD EVER
THERE WERE REPORTS YESTERDAY
THAT GUSTS HAD HIT 196 MILES PER
HOUR
>>> FROM JAPAN TONIGHT, NE
INDICATIONS THAT THE ACCIDENT AT
THE FUKUSHIMA NUCLEAR POWE
PLANT WAS WORSE THAN PREVIOUSL
THOUGHT.
A U.N. REPORT SAID WORKERS
COPING WITH THE MARCH 2011
DISASTER WERE ACTUALLY EXPOSED
TO RADIATION DOSES 20% HIGHE
THAN PREVIOUSLY BELIEVED
THE ACCIDENT WAS TRIGGERED BY
HUGE EARTHQUAKE.
>>> FROM AFGHANISTAN, REPORT
THAT SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN
KERRY AND AFGHAN PRESIDENT HAMID
KARZAI HAVE MADE PROGRESS IN
TALKS ON WHETHER AMERICAN TROOPS
REMAIN IN THAT COUNTRY BEYON
MOST TROOPS SERVING BEYOND THA
TIME WOULD BE USED TO TRAI
AFGHAN FORCES, A SMALLER NUMBE
WOULD CONSIST OF SPECIAL
OPERATIONS FORCES TARGETING AL
QAEDA.
>>> REPORTS THAT AMAZON HA
REMOVED SEVERAL ABUSE-THEMED
BOOKS FROM ITS KINDLE STORE.
THIS AFTER A REPORT THAT CERTAIN
PEOPLE WHO TYPED IN CERTAI
INNOCUOUS KEYWORDS WERE TAKEN TO
THE BOOKS.
>> Reporter: REPORTEDLY FOUND ON
THE SELF-PUBLISHED SECTION
>>> NOW TO OUR SIGNATURE
SEGMENT, OUR IN-DEPTH REPORT
FROM AROUND THE NATION AND
AROUND THE WORLD
TONIGHT, OUR FOCUS IS ON A GROUP
OF MEN WHO GOT CAUGHT UP IN TH
U.S. WAR ON TERROR
THEY SPENT YEARS IN PRISON A
GUANTANAMO BAY ON WHAT AMERICA
JUDGES LATER DETERMINED WA
INSUFFICIENT EVIDENCE.
THAT WAS HARDLY THE END OF THEIR
PROBLEMS
EVEN AFTER THEY WERE FREED, THEY
WERE SENT HALFWAY AROUND THE
WORLD WHERE THEIR STRUGGLES HAVE
CONTINUED.
CORRESPONDENT WILLIAM BRANGHAM
MET THEM
AND THEIR SITUATION REMAIN
UNCHANGED TODAY.
>> Reporter: ON THEIR FIRST FE
DAYS ON THE PACIFIC ISLAND
NATION OF PALAU, THESE MEN
EASILY COULD HAVE PASSED FOR
TOURISTS, JUST LIKE TH
THOUSANDS OF OTHERS WHO COME
HERE TO SCUBA DIVE ON SOME O
THE WORLD'S BEST CORAL REEFS
BUT THEIR STAY HERE DIDN'T LAS
DAYS OR WEEKS AND IT'S HARDL
BEEN A VACATION.
THESE MEN HAVE NOW BEEN STRANDED
HERE FOUR YEARS, CUT OFF FRO
FRIENDS AND MOST FAMILY.
CAUGHT UP, THEY BELIEVE, IN TH
FOG OF WAR AND AMERICA'S WAR O
TERROR
>> WE DON'T HAVE ENOUGH MONEY.
YOU DON'T HAVE PASSPORT.
YOU DON'T HAVE HOME.
>> Reporter: AHMAD TOURSON AND
HIS FRIENDS ARE PART OF AN
ETHNIC MUSLIM GROUP FROM XINXANG
KNOWN AS UIGHURS
THOUSANDS OF UIGHURS HAVE FLED
THAT COUNTRY
>> THEY WERE FLEEING PERSECUTION
IN VARIOUS FORMS IN CHINA.
>> Reporter: DIXON IS A LAWYER
REPRESENTING SEVERAL OF TH
UIGHURS IN PALAU
>> THEY WOULD WALK ACROSS TH
BORDER KYRGYZSTAN AND THEY WOULD
HEAR ABOUT THESE UIGHURS
>> Reporter: IT WAS ALL BEFORE
9/11
>> BEFORE 9/11
>> Reporter: ONCE IN
AFGHANISTAN, SOME OF THE UIGHURS
LIVED IN AREAS THAT WERE UNDER
CONTROL OF THE TALIBAN
AND THEN WHE
THE U.S. INVADED THAT COUNTRY IN
RETALIATION FOR 9/11, U.S.
GROUND FORCES CAPTURED THOUSANDS
OF TALIBAN AND AL QAEDA FIGHTERS
IN THE VERY AREA WHERE THE
UIGHURS LIVED.
SEVERAL DOZEN UIGHURS WERE ALS
TAKEN INTO CUSTODY, HELD A
SUSPECTED TERRORISTS
THE U.S. GOVERNMENT LATE
CLAIMED SOME HAD BEEN UNDERGOING
MILITARY TRAINING.
>> THE MEN WERE PICKED UP IN THE
FOG OF WAR
THEY WERE ROUNDED UP AND SOLD TO
THE UNITED STATES FOR MONEY, FOR
BOUNTIES, FOR $5,000 APIECE.
>> Reporter: WAS IT APPROPRIAT
TO CAPTURE THEM?
AND I THINK THE ANSWER TO THAT
IS IT WAS CERTAINLY APPROPRIAT
TO CAPTURE THEM.
>> Reporter: BENJAMIN WITTES I
A FELLOW AT THE BROOKING
INSTITUTE AND SERVES ON TH
TASKS FOR AT THE HOOVE
INSTITUTION.
>> THE INITIAL CAPTURE OF TH
UIGHURS, IF YOU CONSIDER IT FROM
A U.S. MILITARY POINT OF VIE
MAKES ALL THE SENSE IN THE
WORLD.
THESE ARE PEOPLE WHO CAME TO
AFGHANISTAN TO TAKE TRAINING AND
WHO ARE IN THE TORA BORA REGIO
AND FLEEING ACROSS THE PAKISTANI
BORDER AT THE SAME TIME THAT
LOTS OF FOREIGN FIGHTERS O
EXACTLY THE SORT THAT THE UNITED
STATES IS MOST WORRIED ABOUT
ARE.
>> Reporter: WHILE WITTES IS A
STRONG DEFENDER OF THE RIGHT T
CAPTURE AND DETAIN POTENTIAL
TERROR SUSPECTS, HE THINKS THE
UIGHURS WERE JUST IN THE WRONG
PLACE AT THE WRONG TIME.
>> THESE ARE ACTUALLY NOT PEOPLE
WHO HAVE A PROBLEM WITH TH
UNITED STATES.
THESE ARE PEOPLE WHO HAVE
PROBLEM WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF
CHINA AND WHOSE MARRIAGE O
CONVENIENCE WITH THE TALIBAN I
REALLY JUST A CONVENIENCE THING.
IT'S NOT PART OF ANY GLOBA
JIHAD.
>> Reporter: DID THE U.S. HAVE
ANY EVIDENCE THAT THESE MEN HA
ANY PLANNING OR TRAINING T
ATTACK THE UNITED STATES
>> ABSOLUTELY NOT.
THERE HAS NEVER BEEN A
ALLEGATION THAT THE UIGHURS BORE
ANY ILL WILL TOWARDS THE UNITE
STATES
IN FACT, WHEN THE UIGHURS WERE
TURNED OVER TO THE UNITE
STATES, THEY THOUGHT THAT THEY
HAD BEEN SAVED
THEY WERE SOON TO FIND OUT THA
THAT WOULD NOT BE THEIR FATE
>> Reporter: NEARLY TWO DOZE
UIGHURS WERE SENT TO THE
GUANTANAMO BAY DIMENSION CAMP IN
CUBA WHERE THEY WERE HELD FO
OVER SEVEN YEARS
IN 2008, SEVERAL U.S. FEDERA
JUDGES DECLARED THE EVIDENCE
AGAINST THE MEN WAS BASED ON
UNVERIFIABLE CLAIMS AND THEY
RULED THEY COULD NO LONGER B
CLASSIFIED AS ENEMY COMBATANTS
THEY WERE ORDERED SET FREE
BUT THEN CONGRESS PASSED AND
PRESIDENT OBAMA SIGNED A LAW
THAT BLOCKED ANY GUANTANAM
PRISONERS FROM COMING TO THE
U.S.
>> THE CHINESE GOVERNMENT MAKE
CLEAR THAT IT WANTS THEM BACK,
YOU HAVE NO CONFIDENCE THAT THEY
WILL NOT ABUSE THEM.
IN FACT, YOU SUSPECT THEY WILL
THEY DO NOT WANT TO GO BACK TO
CHINA, WHICH THEY COULD HAVE
DONE, BY THE WAY
BUT VERY UNDERSTANDABLY HAVE N
INTEREST IN GOING BACK TO CHIN
TO BE TORTURED OR EXECUTED
WHAT HAPPENS THEN?
>> Reporter: THE STATE
DEPARTMENT WHICH DECLINED TO
COMMENT FOR THIS STORY WAS
REPORTEDLY UNWILLING TO SEND THE
MEN BACK TO CHINA AND HAD BEEN
TRYING FOR SEVERAL YEARS TO FIND
NATIONS WHO'D TAKE IN TH
UIGHURS AND FINALLY HAD SOME
SUCCESS.
ALL BUT THREE UIGHURS WERE
TRANSFERRED OUT OF GUANTANAMO.
SOME WERE SENT TO ALBANIA, E
SALVADOR, BERMUDA AN
SWITZERLAND.
IN OCTOBER OF 2009, SIX WERE
SENT AROUND THE WORLD TO PALAU
PALAU IS A TINY PACIFIC ISLAND
NATION OF JUST 20,000 RESIDENTS.
AS A FORMER U.S. TERRITORY, TH
COUNTRY HAS HAD STRONG MILITAR
AND FINANCIAL TIES TO THE U.S.
FOR YEARS.
THE UIGHURS' ARRIVAL HERE WA
SUPPOSED TO BE A FRESH START
BUT THE FRONT PAGE OF THE MAIN
PALAUAN NEWSPAPER REPORTED THEIR
ARRIVAL LIKE THIS "A PLANE
ARRIVED AT THE WEE HOURS AND
EMERGED SIX BEARDED MUSLIM
TERRORISTS IN SHACKLES AND
GUARDED BY MANY FULLY ARME
COMMANDOS.
THE MEN TOLD US THAT FIRST
IMPRESSION HAS BEEN VERY HARD TO
SHAKE.
>> THEY SHOW, THE NEWSPAPERS
SHOW US, THE OTHERS, LIK
TERRORISTS
THEY THINK, OH, SIX TERRORISTS
CAME HERE, SEE BAD
WHEN THEY SAW US, VERY ANGRY
THEY ASK, WHY YOU ARE HERE
>> Reporter: THE UIGHURS SAY
THEY STICK TO THEMSELVES
OVER THE YEARS AS WHAT WAS
SUPPOSED TO BE JUST A TEMPORAR
STAY IN PALAU HAS STRETCHED ON
YEAR AFTER YEAR.
THEIR LAWYERS, ALONG WITH TH
PALAUAN GOVERNMENT HAVE WORKED
HARD TO BRING SOME OF THEI
FAMILY MEMBERS TO JOIN THEM.
AHMAD TOURSON WHO SAYS HE WENT
TO COLLEGE BACK IN CHINA, WA
GIVEN A JOB WORKING THE NIGH
SHIFT AS A SECURITY GUARD AT THE
LOCAL POWER PLANT.
SEVERAL OF THE OTHER UIGHURS GOT
SIMILAR MENIAL JOBS LIKE WORKING
AT GAS STATIONS.
>> WE CANNOT PROVIDE FOR OUR
FAMILIES
HARD TIMES
>> Reporter: THERE ARE VIRTUALLY
NO OTHER MUSLIMS IN PALAU.
IT'S A MAJORITY CHRISTIA
COUNTRY.
WHILE THE UIGHURS SAY THEY'R
GRATEFUL TO THE PALAUA
GOVERNMENT, THEY'RE HOPING TO BE
RESETTLED IN ANOTHER COUNTRY
LIKE AUSTRALIA, WHERE THERE'S
THRIVING UIGHUR POPULATION
FOR NOW, THOUGH, THEY'RE
STRANDED IN LIMBO.
>> THE PRINCIPAL REASON TH
SITUATION DEVELOPED IS THAT TH
UNITED STATES WAS COMMITTED NO
TO RETURNING THESE PEOPLE TO
CHINA.
AND SO IN SOME SENSE, THE WHOL
PROBLEM DEVELOPED IN PAR
BECAUSE THE UNITED STATES WA
NOT WILLING TO SEE THESE PEOPL
HARMED OR TORTURED
>> Reporter: SOME OF OUR VIEWERS
MIGHT LOOK AT THE IDEA OF BEIN
STRANDED IN PALAU WHICH TO MAN
PEOPLE IS AN ISLAND PARADISE A
NOT THE WORST PLACE IN THE WORLD
TO BE STUCK FOR A FEW YEARS.
>> PALAU IS CERTAINLY NOT TH
WORST PLACE IN THE WORLD TO BE
STUCK FOR ANYONE, INCLUDING TH
UIGHURS.
FOR THE UIGHURS BEING IN CHINA
WOULD BE THE WORST PLACE IN TH
WORLD.
BUT THEY CAN'T BREATHE THA
FINAL SIGH OF RELIEF BECAUSE
THEY DON'T KNOW WHERE THEY'R
ULTIMATELY GOING TO END UP
AND THAT TAKES A TREMENDOU
PSYCHOLOGICAL TOLL ON THEM
>> ON THE FIRST DAY, THE FEW
MONTHS, WE THINK, WE ARE
RESTORED THIS IS OUR VACATION,
EVERYTHING IS BEAUTIFUL.
AND THE SWIMMING AND THE VIEW,
AND THE WEATHER, BUT AFTER YEARS
AND, WHAT DO WE THINK?
HOMELESS, STATELESS, MONEYLESS
EVERYTHING
>>> ELEANOR MOSEMAN SPENT A YEAR
LIVING WITH UIGHUR FAMILIES IN
XINJIANG, CHINA, EXPERIENCED
LIFE AMONG THE UIGHURS A
NEWSHOUR.PBS.ORG
>>> FOR MANY AMERICANS, IRAN I
VIEWED THROUGH THE LENS OF
MIDDLE EAST POLITICS AND NUCLEAR
WEAPONS CAPABILITIES
AND THE ISLAMIC REVOLUTION THERE
IN 1979 TURNED IT INTO A FAR
MORE CLOSED SOCIETY.
BUT NOW IN AN EXHIBIT AT THE SAY
SHA SOCIETY HERE IN NEW YORK
THERE'S AN OPPORTUNITY TO GET
GLIMPSE OF IRAN THROUGH ITS AR
IN WORKS JUDGED UNSUITABLE AFTER
THE REVOLUTION AND HAVE BARELY
BEEN SEEN SINCE.
THROUGH SYMBOLISM AN
CARICATURES OF PEOPLE IN POWER
NIKKI'S ARTWORK WALKS A FINE
LINE BETWEEN ART AND POLITICS.
>> I DON'T HAVE A CLEAR IDEA
I PLAY WITH IDEAS.
THERE'S SOME AMBIGUITY IN TH
ART.
>> Reporter: SO THIS I
KHAMENEI
>> ON ONE SIDE
>> Reporter: HE FACED SHAR
CRITICISM IN HIS HOMELAND OF
IRAN
AFTER THE OUSTING IN 1979, THE
NEW KHAMENEI REGIME, ARTWORK WAS
CONSIDERED OFF LIMITS.
>> ART DIED FOR TEN YEARS ALMOST
AFTER THE REVOLUTION
A LOT OF PEOPLE WENT
UNDERGROUND, A LOT OF PEOPLE
DIDN'T WORK AT ALL
>> Reporter: NICKY WAS EXILE
FROM IRAN AFTER AN EXHIBITION OF
HIS WORKS IN THE TEHRAN MUSEUM
OF CONTEMPORARY ART IN 1980.
>> THEY VIEWED ME AS
ANTI-REVOLUTION AN
ANTI-KHAMENEI AND ANTI-REGIME.
I HAD THE CALL TWO DAYS LATER,
DON'T TALK TO ANYONE, JUST STA
AWAY
IF YOU CAN, GET OUT OF THE
COUNTRY.
>> Reporter: AND YOU LEFT?
>> AND I LEFT.
>> Reporter: YOU LEFT YOUR
PAINTINGS?
>> I LEFT THE PAINTINGS.
ALL OF THEM AT THE MUSEUM.
>> Reporter: WHERE ARE THEY NOW?
>> GOOD QUESTION
>> Reporter: NICKY IS NOT SURE
HE'LL EVER BE ABLE TO GO BACK TO
IRAN LET ALONE SHOW HIS WORK
THERE.
BUT HERE IN THE U.S., HE
CONTINUES TO PAINT AND HIS WOR
FROM BEFORE THE REVOLUTION I
GARNERING NEW ATTENTION FOR
TIME WHEN ART IN IRAN WAS NO
CENSORED BUT ENCOURAGED.
NICKY'S WORK FROM THIS PERIOD IS
PART OF A NEW EXHIBIT OF 2
MODERN IRANIAN ARTISTS AT NE
YORK'S ASIA SOCIETY, WITH MORE
THAN 100 SCULPTURES, PAINTINGS
AND PHOTOGRAPHS, IT'S TH
LARGEST EXHIBITION OF ITS KIND
OUTSIDE OF IRAN.
IN THE 1950s, '60s AND '70s,
MODERN ART IN IRAN WAS THRIVING.
IT COMBINED PERSIAN ARTISTIC
TRADITIONS WITH AVON GUARD
STYLE.
ARTISTS TRAVELED TO AND FROM THE
WEST EXCHANGING TECHNIQUES
THE SCENE WAS SO SIGNIFICANT
THAT TEHRAN HAS ITS OW
WORLDWIDE ART FAIR EVERY TWO
YEARS.
>> IT WAS WHEN IRAN AS A SOCIETY
WAS MODERNIZING.
SO THE ARTISTS WERE ALSO
MODERNIZING THEIR WORK IN MANY
DIFFERENT WAYS
AND IT BECAME A REAL KIND OF
CULTURAL FLOWERING OF IRANIA
ART DURING THIS TIME
>> Reporter: MELISSA CHU IS TH
DIRECTOR OF THE ASIA SOCIETY I
NEW YORK
IN THE MIDST OF INCREASING
TENSIONS BETWEEN IRAN AND TH
U.S., SHE HOPES THE EXHIBI
SHEDS A DIFFERENT LIGHT ON
IRAN'S HISTORY
>> THE EXHIBITION IS ABOUT A
PERIOD WHEN ACTUALLY IRAN AN
THE U.S. WERE QUITE CLOS
POLITICALLY AND CERTAINL
CULTURALLY
SO THERE WAS A LOT MORE BACK AND
FORTH AND CLOSER COMMUNICATION
THAN WE HAVE NOW WITH TH
POLITICAL SITUATION.
>> Reporter: AND CHU NOTES THA
CONTEMPORARY ARTISTS CONTINUE TO
FACE CENSORSHIP IN IRAN.
WHAT IS IT ABOUT ART THAT IS S
DANGEROUS TO REGIMES
>> WELL, I THINK ARTISTS ARE
OFTEN THE VOICE OF CRITICALITY
THEY CRITIQUE ISSUES OF POWER.
THEY CRITIQUE THINGS THEY SE
AROUND THEM.
AND I THINK THAT CAN SOMETIMES
MAKE IT DIFFICULT FOR THOSE IN
POWER.
>> Reporter: BUT ART IS ALMOST
IMPOSSIBLE TO SUPPRESS
THE CONTEMPORARY ART SCENE HAS
BEEN GAINING STRENGTH IN IRAN IN
RECENT YEARS, PARTICULARLY I
ANIMATION, FILM AND PHOTOGRAPHY.
ARTISTS FROM IRAN HAVE WON WORLD
PRESS PHOTO AWARDS
AND LAST YEAR, THE IRANIAN FIL
"A SEPARATION" WON THE OSCAR FOR
BEST FOREIGN FILM.
THE FIRST ONE EVER FOR IRAN.
AND THERE ARE HOPES THAT UNDER
THE NEW GOVERNMENT IN TEHRAN
THERE WILL BE SOME RELAXATION OF
IRAN'S INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONSHIPS.
AND WITH IT, RELAXATION OF
RESTRICTIONS ON ARTISTIC
EXPRESSION THAT COULD ALLO
NICKY'S WORK TO BE SEEN IN HIS
HOMELAND AGAIN
>>> THIS IS PBS "NEWS HOUR
WEEKEND" SATURDAY.
>>> FINALLY TONIGHT, A SUBJECT
THAT TOUCHES MILLIONS OF LIVES
THE STRUGGLE AGAINST
ALZHEIMER'S.
WHILE SCIENTISTS HAVE TRIE
UNSUCCESSFULLY FOR YEARS TO TR
TO FIGURE OUT HOW TO CURE TH
DISEASE, NEW EXPERIMENTS BEING
DONE ON MICE IN GREAT BRITAI
OFFER A GLIMMER OF HOPE.
MARTIN GEISLER REPORTS
>> Reporter: FOR FIVE YEARS, A
TEAM HAS BEEN WORKING IN THI
LABORATORY IN LESTER LOOKING FOR
A CURE FOR ALZHEIMER'S
NOW THEY BELIEVE THEY'VE FOUND
ONE.
THEY TESTED A CHEMICAL COMPOUN
ON MICE WITH DRAMATIC RESULTS.
ALL THE ANIMALS HAD
INCREDIBLING BRAIN CONDITION
THE ONES GIVEN THE MEDICATIO
MADE A REMARKABLE RECOVERY
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE MIC
IS EXTRAORDINARY
IT ATTACKS THE BRAIN IN
SIMILAR WAY TO ALZHEIMER'S
SO THE TREATMENT THIS ONE HA
BEEN GIVEN SHOULD TRANSLAT
PERFECTLY INTO A MEDICINE THAT
HUMANS CAN TAKE.
ALZHEIMER'S SETS IN WHEN
MISSHAPEN PROTEINS BUILD UP IN
THE BRAIN.
THE BRAIN SHUTS DOWN ITS OWN
ABILITY TO PRODUCE ANY PROTEIN
AT ALL
BRAIN CELLS WHICH NEED PROTEIN
FOR PROTECTION BEGIN TO DIE OFF.
THIS LEADS TO SYMPTOMS LIK
CONFUSION AND MEMORY LOSS.
RESEARCHERS GAVE MICE THE NE
DRUG WHICH CAN BE TAKEN AS A
PILL
THEY FOUND IT GOT PROTEI
PRODUCTION MOVING AGAIN.
SO WITH PROTECTION BACK IN
PLACE, CELLS SURVIVE AND DISEASE
CAN'T SPREAD
THE TREATMENT CARRIES SOME
SERIOUS SIDE EFFECTS WHICH WIL
HAVE TO BE ELIMINATED.
BUT IT COULD BE AVAILABLE AS A
MEDICINE AS SOON AS THAT'S DONE.
>> IT TAKES A LONG TIME TO GET
DRUGS TO MARKET.
BUT THIS ISN'T YEARS AND YEARS
AWAY
MAYBE FIVE TO TEN YEARS.
>> Reporter: IT'S BEEN DESCRIBED
AS A MILESTONE, A MOMENT I
MEDICAL HISTORY, THE KIND OF
LANGUAGE YOU RARELY HEAR FRO
THE NORMALLY CAUTIOUS SCIENTIFIC
COMMUNITY.
>> IT IS A LANDMARK BUT TH
BEGINNING OF A LONG JOURNEY, NOT
THE END.
>>> JOIN US TOMORROW ON AIR AN
ONLINE
WE REPORT ON A PROGRAM DESIGNE
TO HELP THOSE MOST AT RISK O
DYING DURING CHILDBIRTH.
>> WE DON'T WORK FOR THE
HOSPITAL OR FOR THE BIRTHING
CENTER
WE DON'T WORK FOR THE MIDWIFE.
WE WORK FOR THE WOMAN.
>> RECAPPING TODAY'S TOP STORY
MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE O
REPRESENTATIVES LEAVE WASHINGTON
WITH NO DEAL ON THE GOVERNMENT
SHUTDOWN OR THE DEBT CEILING
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION O
PBS "NEWS HOUR WEEKEND."
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN
THANKS FOR WATCHING.